vmware: Add docs for filters (#71670)
ansible/ansible: docs/docsite/rst/scenario_guides/vmware_scenarios/vmware_inventory_filters.rst

.. _vmware_ansible_inventory_using_filters:

*************************************************
Using VMware dynamic inventory plugin - Filters
*************************************************

> .. contents:: Topics

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.. contents::
  :local:
```

> VMware dynamic inventory plugin - Filtering VMware Guests

Reviewer: ```suggestion
VMware dynamic inventory plugin - filtering VMware guests
```

=========================================================

> VMware inventory plugin allows you to filters VMware guests using the ``filters`` configuration parameter.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
VMware inventory plugin allows you to filter VMware guests using the ``filters`` configuration parameter.
```

> In this scenario guide, we will see how you configure ``filters`` for the given VMware guest in the inventory.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This section shows how you configure ``filters`` for the given VMware guest in the inventory.
```

Requirements
------------

To use the VMware dynamic inventory plugins, you must install `pyVmomi <https://github.com/vmware/pyvmomi>`_
on your control node (the host running Ansible).

To include tag-related information for the virtual machines in your dynamic inventory, you also need the `vSphere Automation SDK <https://code.vmware.com/web/sdk/65/vsphere-automation-python>`_, which supports REST API features such as tagging and content libraries, on your control node.
You can install the ``vSphere Automation SDK`` following `these instructions <https://github.com/vmware/vsphere-automation-sdk-python#installing-required-python-packages>`_.

.. code-block:: bash

    $ pip install pyvmomi

Starting in Ansible 2.10, the VMware dynamic inventory plugin is available in the ``community.vmware`` collection included Ansible.

> To install the latest ``community.vmware`` collection:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Alternately, to install the latest ``community.vmware`` collection:
```

.. code-block:: bash

    $ ansible-galaxy collection install community.vmware

To use this VMware dynamic inventory plugin:

1. Enable it first by specifying the following in the ``ansible.cfg`` file:

.. code-block:: ini

  [inventory]
  enable_plugins = community.vmware.vmware_vm_inventory

2. Create a file that ends in ``vmware.yml`` or ``vmware.yaml`` in your working directory.

The ``vmware_vm_inventory`` inventory plugin takes in the same authentication information as any other VMware modules does.

> Let us assume we want to list all RHEL7 vms with the power state as "poweredOn", a valid inventory file with filters for the given VMware guest looks like:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let us assume we want to list all RHEL7 VMs with the power state as "poweredOn". A valid inventory file with filters for the given VMware guest looks as follows:
```

.. code-block:: yaml

    plugin: community.vmware.vmware_vm_inventory
    strict: False
    hostname: 10.65.223.31
    username: administrator@vsphere.local
    password: Esxi@123$%
    validate_certs: False
    with_tags: False
    hostnames:
    - config.name
    filters:
    - config.guestId == "rhel7_64Guest"
    - summary.runtime.powerState == "poweredOn"

Here, we have configured two filters -

* ``config.guestId`` is equal to ``rhel7_64Guest``
* ``summary.runtime.powerState`` is equal to ``poweredOn``

> This will retrieve all the virtual machine which satisfies these two conditions and populate them in the inventory.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This retrieves all the VMs that satisfy these two conditions and populates them in the inventory.
```

Notice that the conditions are combined using an ``and`` operation.

Using ``or`` conditions in filters
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> Let us assume you want filter RHEL7 and Ubuntu vms, you can use multiple filters using ``or`` condition in your inventory file.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let us assume you want filter RHEL7 and Ubuntu VMs. You can use multiple filters using ``or`` condition in your inventory file.
```

> A valid filter in VMware inventory file will be:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A valid filter in the VMware inventory file for this example is:
```

.. code-block:: yaml

    plugin: community.vmware.vmware_vm_inventory
    strict: False
    hostname: 10.65.223.31
    username: administrator@vsphere.local
    password: Esxi@123$%
    validate_certs: False
    with_tags: False
    hostnames:
    - config.name
    filters:
    - config.guestId == "rhel7_64Guest" or config.guestId == "ubuntu64Guest"

You can check all allowed properties for filters for the given virtual machine at :ref:`vmware_inventory_vm_attributes`.

> If you are using ``properties`` parameter with custom vm properties, make sure that you include all the properties used by filters as well in your VM property list.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you are using the ``properties`` parameter with custom VM properties, make sure that you include all the properties used by filters as well in your VM property list.
```

> For example, if we want all RHEL7 and Ubuntu vms which are poweredOn, you can use inventory file:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, if we want all RHEL7 and Ubuntu vms that are poweredOn, you can use inventory file:
```

.. code-block:: yaml

    plugin: community.vmware.vmware_vm_inventory
    strict: False
    hostname: 10.65.223.31
    username: administrator@vsphere.local
    password: Esxi@123$%
    validate_certs: False
    with_tags: False
    hostnames:
    - 'config.name'
    properties:
    - 'config.name'
    - 'config.guestId'
    - 'guest.ipAddress'
    - 'summary.runtime.powerState'
    filters:
    - config.guestId == "rhel7_64Guest" or config.guestId == "ubuntu64Guest"
    - summary.runtime.powerState == "poweredOn"

> Here, we are using minimum vm properties, that is ``config.name``, ``config.guestId``, ``summary.runtime.powerState``, and ``guest.ipAddress``.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here, we are using minimum VM properties, that is ``config.name``, ``config.guestId``, ``summary.runtime.powerState``, and ``guest.ipAddress``.
```

> * ``config.name`` is used by ``hostnames`` parameter.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* ``config.name`` is used by the ``hostnames`` parameter.
```

> * ``config.guestId`` and ``summary.runtime.powerState`` are used by ``filters`` parameter.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* ``config.guestId`` and ``summary.runtime.powerState`` are used by the ``filters`` parameter.
```

> * ``guest.guestId`` is used by ``ansible_host`` internally by inventory plugin.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* ``guest.guestId`` is used by ``ansible_host`` internally by the  inventory plugin.
```

> Executing ``ansible-inventory --list -i <filename>.vmware.yml`` will create a list of the virtual machines that are ready to be configured using Ansible.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Executing ``ansible-inventory --list -i <filename>.vmware.yml`` creates a list of the virtual machines that are ready to be configured using Ansible.
```

What to expect
--------------

> You will notice that the inventory hosts are filtered depending upon your ``filters`` section.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You will notice that the inventory hosts are filtered depending on your ``filters`` section.
```

.. code-block:: yaml

    {
      "_meta": {
        "hostvars": {
            "template_001": {
                "config.name": "template_001",
                "config.guestId": "ubuntu64Guest",
                ...
                "guest.toolsStatus": "toolsNotInstalled",
                "summary.runtime.powerState": "poweredOn",
            },
            "vm_8046": {
                "config.name": "vm_8046",
                "config.guestId": "rhel7_64Guest",
                ...
                "guest.toolsStatus": "toolsNotInstalled",
                "summary.runtime.powerState": "poweredOn",
            },
        ...
    }

> Troubleshooting

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Troubleshooting VMware filters
```

> ---------------

Reviewer: ```suggestion
-----------------------------------
```

If the custom property specified in ``filters`` fails:

- Check if the values provided for username and password are correct.
- Make sure it is a valid property, see :ref:`vmware_inventory_vm_attributes`.
- Use ``strict: True`` to get more information about the error.

> - Please make sure that you are using latest version VMware collection.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Please make sure that you are using latest version of the VMware collection.
```
